.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds V 1.3.2
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de OP
.BR "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6"
..
.de OA
.IR "\fB\\$1\& \|\fI\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6"
..
.de QO
.RB ` "\\$1" "'\\$2"
..
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.TH GIFSICLE 1 "3 Sep 1998" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
gifsicle \- manipulates GIF images and animations
'
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gifsicle
\%[options, frames, and filenames].\|.\|.
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gifsicle
manipulates GIF image files. It supports merging several GIFs into a GIF
animation; exploding an animation into its component frames; changing
individual frames in an animation; turning interlacing on and off; adding
transparency; adding delays, disposals, and looping to animations; adding
or removing comments; optimizing animations for space; and changing images'
colormaps, among other things. Extensive command-line options control
which, if any, of these occur.
.PP
This man page assumes that you know what GIFs and GIF animations are. For a
tutorial, you might try Royal Frazier's GIF Animation Page on the World
Wide Web at http://member.aol.com/royalef/gifanim\%.htm.
.PP
The next sections tell you how to run
.BR gifsicle
in gory detail. New users might want to skip to the Examples section at the
end.
'
.SH COMMAND LINE

.BR gifsicle 's
command line consists of
.IR "GIF input files" 
and
.IR options .
Most options start with a dash (\-) or plus (+); frame selections, a kind
of option, start with a number sign (#). Anything else is a GIF input file.
.PP
.B gifsicle
reads and processes GIF input files in order. If no GIF input file is
given, or you give the special filename `\-',
it reads from the standard input.
'
.SH OPTIONS

Every option has a long form,
.QO \-\-long\-descriptive\-name .
You don't need to type the whole long descriptive name, just enough to
make it unambiguous.
.PP
Some options also have a short form,
.QO \-X .
You can combine short options if they don't take arguments:
.QO \-IIb
is the same as
.QO "\-I \-I \-b" .
But be careful with options that do take arguments:
.QO \-cblah
means
.QO "\-c \fRblah" ,
not
.QO "\-c \-b \-l \-a \-h" .
.PP
Many options also have a converse,
.QO \-\-no\-option ,
which turns off the option. You can turn off a short option
.QO \-X
by saying
.QO \+X
instead.
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Mode Options

Mode options tell
.B gifsicle
what kind of output to generate. There can be at most one mode option,
which must precede any GIF inputs.
.TP 5
.OP \-\-merge ", " \-m
'
Combines all GIF inputs into one file with multiple frames and writes that
file to the standard output. This is the default mode.
'
.TP
.OP \-\-batch ", " \-b
'
Modifies each GIF input in place by reading and writing to the same
filename. (GIFs read from the standard input are written to the standard
output.)
'
.TP
.OP \-\-explode ", " \-e
'
Separates each GIF input into its individual frames, and writes the frames
as separate GIFs to the files `input.0', `input.1', and so on, where
`input' represents the name of the input file (or `#stdin#' for the
standard input).
'
.TP
.OP \-\-explode\-by\-name ", " \-E
'
Same as
.OP \-\-explode ","
but writes named frames to files `input.\fIname\fR' instead of
`input.\fIframe-number\fR'.
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS General Options

General options control what information
.B gifsicle
prints and where it writes its output. The info options and
.OP \-\-verbose
can be turned off with
.QO \-\-no\-option .
'
.Sp
.PD 0
.TP 5
.OP \-\-color\-info
'
Like
.OP \%\-\-info ,
but also prints information about input files' colormaps.
.OP \%\-\-cinfo
is a synonym for
.OP \%\-\-color\-info .
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.OP \-\-extension\-info
'
Like
.OP \%\-\-info ,
but also prints any unrecognized GIF extensions in a
.BR hexdump (1)-like
format.
.OP \%\-\-xinfo
is a synonym for
.OP \%\-\-extension\-info .
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.OP \-\-help ", " \-h
'
Prints usage information and exits.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.OP \-\-info ", " \-I
'
Prints a summary of the contents of each input GIF to standard output,
and suppresses normal output. (If you give two
.OP \-\-info
or
.OP \-I
options,
.B gifsicle
produces normal output and also writes the summary information to standard
error.)
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-o file
.TP
.OA \-\-output file
'
Sends output to
.IR file .
The special filename `-' means the standard output.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-\-verbose ", " \-v
'
Prints progress information (files read and written) to standard
error.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-\-version
'
Prints the version number and some quickie warranty information and exits.
'
.PD
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Frame Selections

A frame selection tells
.B gifsicle
which frames to use from the current input file. They are useful only for
animations, as non-animated GIFs only have one frame. Here are the legal
forms for frame specifications.
.Sp
.PD 0
.TP 13
.BI # num
'
Select frame \fInum\fR. (The first frame is
.QO #0 .
Negative numbers count backwards from the last frame, which is
.QO #-1 .)
'
.TP 13
.BI # num1 \- num2
'
Select frames \fInum1\fR through \fInum2\fR.
'
.TP 13
.BI # num1 \-
'
Select frames \fInum1\fR through the last frame.
'
.TP 13
.BI # name
'
Select the frame named \fIname\fR.
.PD
.PP
For example,
.Sp
.RS 5
\fBgifsicle\fR happy.gif
.RE
.Sp
will use all of `happy.gif's frames, while
.Sp
.RS 5
\fBgifsicle\fR happy.gif #0
.RE
.Sp
will only use the first.
.PP
What
.B gifsicle
does with the selected frames depends on the current mode. In merge
mode, only the selected frames are merged into the output GIF. In
batch mode, only the selected frames are modified; other frames remain
unchanged. In explode mode, only the selected frames are exploded into
output GIFs.
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Frame Change Options

Frame change options insert new frames into an animation or replace or
delete frames that already exist. Some things\*Efor example, changing one
frame in an animation\*Eare difficult to express with frame selection, but
easy with frame changes.
'
.TP 5
.OA \-\-delete frames " [" frames ".\|.\|.]"
'
Deletes
.I frames
from the input GIF.
'
.TP
.OA \-\-insert\-before "frame other-GIFs"
'
Inserts
.I other-GIFs
before
.I frame
in the input GIF.
'
.TP
.OA \-\-append "other-GIFs"
'
Appends
.I other-GIFs
to the input GIF.
'
.TP
.OA \-\-replace "frames other-GIFs"
'
Replaces
.I frames
from the input GIF with
.IR other-GIFs .
'
.TP
\fB\-\-done\fR
'
Completes the current set of frame changes.
'
.PP
The
.I frames
arguments are frame selections (see above). These arguments always refer to
frames from the
.I original
input GIF. So, if `in.gif' has 11 frames and `other.gif' has one, this
command
.Sp
.RS 5
\fBgifsicle\fR in.gif
.OP \-\-delete " #0\-5 " \-\-replace " #10 other.gif"
.RE
.Sp
will work as expected, producing an output animation with 5 frames:
`in.gif' frames 6 through 9, then `other.gif'.
.PP
The
.I other-GIFs
arguments are any number of GIF input files and frame selections.
These images are combined in merge mode and added to the input GIF.
The
.I other-GIFs
last until the next frame change option, so this command replaces the
first frame of `in.gif' with the merge of `a.gif' and `b.gif':
.Sp
.RS 5
\fBgifsicle\fR \-b in.gif
.OP \-\-replace " #0 a.gif b.gif"
.RE
.Sp
This command, however, replaces the first frame of `in.gif' with
`a.gif' and then processes `b.gif' separately:
.Sp
.RS 5
\fBgifsicle\fR \-b in.gif 
.OP \-\-replace " #0 a.gif " \-\-done " b.gif"
.RE
.PP
Warning: You shouldn't use both frame selections and frame changes on
the same input GIF.
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Image Options

Image options modify input images (by changing their interlacing,
transparency, and cropping, for example). Each image option stays in effect
until the next image option in the same category. They have three forms:
.QO \-\-X ,
.QO \-\-no\-X ,
and
.QO \-\-same\-X .
The default is
.QO \-\-same\-X ,
which means that \fBX\fR's value is copied from each input. The
converse,
.QO \-\-no\-X ,
erases \fBX\fR; for instance,
.QO \-\-no\-interlace
turns interlacing off, while
.QO \-\-no\-comments
strips comments. Only the
.QO \-\-X
form is generally described.
'
.Sp
.PD 0
.TP 5
.OA \-B color
.TP
.OA \-\-background color
'
Sets the output GIF's background to
.IR color .
The argument can have the same forms as in the
.OP \-\-transparent
option, below.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.OA \-c text
.TP
.OA \-\-comment text
'
Adds a comment,
.IR text ,
to the output GIF. The comment will be placed before the next frame in
the stream.
.Sp
.OP \-\-no\-comments
and
.OP \-\-same\-comments
affect all the images following, and apply only to input GIF comments,
not ones added with
.OP \-\-comment .
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-\-crop x1 , y1 - x2\fR,\fIy2
.TP
.OA \-\-crop x1 , y1 + width\fRx\fIheight
'
Crops the following frames to a smaller rectangular area. The top-left
corner of this rectangle is
.RI ( x1 , y1 );
you can give either the lower-right corner,
.RI ( x2 , y2 ),
or the width and height of the rectangle. If
.IR width " or " height
is negative, 
.B gifsicle
will make the image's width or height smaller by that amount. For example,
.OP \-\-crop " 2,2+-4x-4"
will shave 2 pixels off each side of the image.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-\-flip\-horizontal
.TP
.OP \-\-flip\-vertical
'
Flips the following frames horizontally or vertically.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-i
.TP
.OP \-\-interlace
'
Turns on interlacing.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-S width x height
.TP
.OA \-\-logical\-screen width x height
'
Sets the output logical screen to
.IR width x height .
.OP \-\-no\-logical\-screen
sets the output logical screen to the size of the largest output
frame, while
.OP \-\-same\-logical\-screen
sets the output logical screen to the largest input logical screen.
.OP \-\-screen
is a synonym for
.OP \-\-logical\-screen .
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-n text
.TP
.OA \-\-name text
'
Sets the next frame's name to
.IR text .
This name is stored as an extension in the output GIF. 
.Sp
.OP \-\-no\-names
and
.OP \-\-same\-names
affect all the images following. They apply only to input GIF names,
not ones added with
.OP \-\-name .
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-p x\fR,\fIy
.TP
.OA \-\-position x\fR,\fIy
'
Sets the following frames' positions to 
.RI ( x , y ).
.OP \-\-no\-position
means
.OP \-\-position " 0,0."
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-\-rotate\-90
.TP
.OP \-\-rotate\-180
.TP
.OP \-\-rotate\-270
'
Rotates the following frames by 90, 180, or 270 degrees.
.OP \-\-no\-rotate
turns off any rotation.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-t color
.TP
.OA \-\-transparent color
'
Makes
.I color
transparent in the following frames.
.I Color
can be a colormap index (0\-255), a hexadecimal color specification
(like #FF00FF for magenta), or slash- or comma-separated red, green
and blue values (each between 0 and 255).
.PD
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Animation Options

Animation options are image options applying only to GIF animations. Most
of them act like image options, and have the same three forms (see above).
'
.Sp
.PD 0
.TP 5
.OA \-d time
.TP
.OA \-\-delay time
'
Sets the delay between frames to
.IR time 
in hundredths of a second.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-D method
.TP
.OA \-\-disposal method
'
Sets the disposal method for the following frames to
.IR method .
.I Method
can be a number between 0 and 7 (although only 0 through 3 are
generally meaningful), or one of these names:
.BR none ","
.BR asis ","
.BR background " (or " bg "),"
.BR previous "."
.OP \-\-no\-disposal
means
.OP \-\-disposal = none .
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-l "[\fIcount\fR]"
.TP
.OP \-\-loopcount "[=\fIcount\fR]"
'
Sets the Netscape loop extension to
.IR count .
.I Count
is an integer, or
.B forever
to loop endlessly. The default is
.BR forever .
.OP \-\-no\-loopcount
turns off looping.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OP \-O "[\fIlevel\fR]"
.TP
.OP \-\-optimize "[=\fIlevel\fR]"
'
Optimizes output GIF animations for space.
.I Level
determines how much optimization is done. There are currently two
levels:
.Sp
.RS
.TP 5
.OP \-O1
Stores only the changed portion of each image. This is the default.
.TP 5
.OP \-O2
Also uses transparency to shrink the file further.
.Sp
.PP
There is no
.OP \-\-same\-optimize
option.
.RE
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.OA \-U
.TP
.OA \-\-unoptimize
'
Unoptimizes GIF animations into an easy-to-edit form.
.Sp
GIF animations are often optimized (see 
.OP \-\-optimize )
to make them smaller and faster to load, which unfortunately makes them
difficult to edit.
.OP \-\-unoptimize
changes optimized input GIFs into unoptimized GIFs, where each frame is a
faithful representation of what a user would see at that point in the
animation.
.Sp
There is no
.OP \-\-same\-unoptimize
option.
.PD
'
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Whole-GIF Options

Whole-GIF options effect entire GIFs as they are read or written. They can
be turned off with
.QO \-\-no\-option .
.Sp
.PD 0
.TP 5
.OA \-\-change\-color color1 " " color2
'
Changes
.I color1
to
.I color2
in the following input GIFs. (The 
.I color
arguments have the same forms as in the
.OP \-t
option.) You can change multiple colors by giving the option multiple
times. Color changes take effect globally when an input GIF is read.
.OP \-\-no\-change\-color
cancels all color changes.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-k num
.TP
.OA \-\-colors num
'
Reduces the number of distinct colors in each output GIF to
.I num
or less.
.I Num 
must be between 2 and 256. This can be used to shrink output GIFs or to
eliminate any local color tables. An adaptive group of colors is chosen
from the existing color table; you can affect this process with the
.OP \-\-color\-method
option.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-\-color\-method method
'
Determines how a smaller colormap is chosen. There are three options:
.BR diversity ,
the default, is
.BR xv (1)'s
diversity algorithm, which uses a strict subset of the existing colors.
.B blend\-diversity
is a modification of this: some color values are blended from a group of
the existing colors.
.B median\-cut
is the median cut algorithm described by Heckbert.
.OP \-\-method
is a synonym for
.OP \-\-color\-method .
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-f
.TP
.OA \-\-dither
'
This option only matters if the colormap was changed; with
.OP \-\-dither
on, Floyd-Steinberg error diffusion is used to approximate any colors that
were removed. This looks better, but makes bigger files and can cause
animation artifacts, so it is off by default.
'
.Sp
.TP
.OA \-\-use\-colormap colormap
'
Sets the image's colormap to 
.IR colormap .
.I Colormap
is either the name of a GIF file, whose global colormap will be used, or
the word
.BR web ,
which represents the 216-color ``Web-safe palette''. If
.OP \-\-colors\fR=\fIN
is also given, an
.IR N \-sized
subset of
.I colormap
will be used.
'
.PD
'
.SH EXAMPLES

Here are a bunch of examples showing how
.B gifsicle
is commonly used.
.PP
This command combines a bunch of GIFs into one animation, `anim.gif':
.Es
% \fBgifsicle a.gif b.gif c.gif d.gif > anim.gif
.Ee
This animation will be a fast-moving sucker, though: since we didn't
specify a delay, it defaults to no time at all. Let's allow .5 seconds
between frames.
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-\-delay 50 a.gif b.gif c.gif d.gif > anim.gif
.Ee
If we also want the GIF to loop three times:
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-d 50 \-\-loop=3 a.gif b.gif c.gif d.gif > anim.gif
.Ee
To separate `anim.gif' into its component frames:
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-\-explode anim.gif\fR
.br
% \fBls anim.gif*\fR
.br
anim.gif    anim.gif.0  anim.gif.1  anim.gif.2  anim.gif.3
.Ee
To interlace all the GIFs in the current directory:
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-bi *.gif
.Ee
To optimize `anim.gif':
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-b \-O2 anim.gif
.Ee
To change the second frame of `anim.gif' to `x.gif':
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-b \-\-unoptimize \-O2 anim.gif \-\-replace #1 x.gif
.Ee
.OP \-\-unoptimize
is used since `anim.gif' was optimized in the last step. Editing
individual frames in optimized GIFs is dangerous without
.OP \-\-unoptimize ;
frames following the changed frame could be corrupted by the change.
Of course, this might be what you want.
.PP
Note that
.OP \-\-unoptimize
and
.OP \-\-optimize
can be on simultaneously.
.OP \-\-unoptimize
affects
.I input
GIF files, while
.OP \-\-optimize
affects
.I output
GIF files.
.PP
To print information about the first and fourth frames of `anim.gif':
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-I #0 #3 < anim.gif\fR
.br
(information printed)
.Ee
To make black the transparent color in all the GIFs in the current
directory, also printing information about each:
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-bII \-\-trans #000000 *.gif\fR
.br
(information printed)
.Ee
Giving
.OP \-I
twice forces normal output to occur. With only one
.OP \-I ,
the GIFs would not have changed on disk.
.PP
To change `anim.gif's colors to a 64-color subset of the Web-safe palette:
.Es
% \fBgifsicle \-b \-\-colors=64 \-\-use\-col=web anim.gif\fR
.Ee
'
.SH BUGS

Please email suggestions, additions, patches and bugs to
eddietwo@lcs.mit.edu. Also email that address to be added to a Gifsicle
mailing list (non-spammy).
'
.SH AUTHORS
.na
Eddie Kohler, eddietwo@lcs.mit.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/~eddietwo/
.br
He wrote it.
.PP
Anne Dudfield, anne@lvld.hp.com
.br
http://web.mit.edu/annied/www/home.html
.br
She named it.
.PP
http://www.lcdf.org/~eddietwo/gifsicle/
.br
The 
.B gifsicle
home page.
'
